---
layout: post
title:  "Ethics"
date:   2016-01-28 6:57pm
categories: jekyll update
---

#Ethics in code
It's increasingly difficult to write code that doesn't brush up against ethics somehow.
I used to think that, as long as I wasn't programming for nuclear reactors or aircraft
control, my code had little overall moral status. Programming seemed an amoral act in
the general case.

Now, however, I'm continuously having to refine my conceptions about the ethics of code.
If I write a tool that is used to make other products, bugs in my code can cause flaws in
those products. Errors can cascade from a toolchain far more than I ever expected. I'm not
saying that I think it is a programmer's moral imperative to ship perfect code. While
that would be lovely, I think such a rule would only be fair in a world in which a
programmer could actually tell when code was flawed. Since we aren't even close to that
happy day, I think a more moderate approach is in order.

I think that an effective way to look at the ethics of creating anything (or, perhaps, of
*doing* anything) is to look at its potential to cause harm. Obviously, harm is difficult
to measure, and a human being can never act with perfect knowledge of the outcome of
their actions. However, I think that it's not too hard to look at a project and see
think through some likely uses for it. If you're working on a software testing suite
that claims to catch certain classes of programming errors, bugs in your code could
lead to bugs in the code that it profiles. However, if you're creating CSS, bugs will not
(hopefully) lead to loss of life or significant profit.

I'm starting to actually write systems that manage money. Don't get me wrong; I'm not
writing PCI-compliant code that stores credit card info. Just simple Stripe integration.
Even so, I'm learning that my decisions in writing code can affect the health of a
business, and it's sobering. I'm also taking over a lot of codebases from a coworker
who recently left my company, and I'm starting to attach a moral imperative to good
comments (though that's probably not fair).

In any case, I think that one should carefully weigh the potential of their code to
hurt others (financially as well as physically). If you're aware that the integrity
of your code could affect the wellbeing of someone else, I do think that you have
a moral imperative to write it well. Especially, I think that you have a moral
imperative to fix bugs when you know that they exist. The simple fact that code is
sometimes shipped with tens or hundreds of thousands of known bugs is stunning and
horrifying to me in equal measure.
